Article Title: Angela Merkel's departure leaves a void in Germany — and a fight to fill it

WorldAngela Merkel's departure leaves a void in Germany — and a fight to fill
it“Whoever comes in isn’t going to have that stature, isn’t going to have that
kind of history and practice,” one analyst said.Get more newsLiveonPrintSept.
25, 2021, 8:30 AM UTCBy Carlo Angerer, Andy Eckardt and Rachel ElbaumMUNICH —
She leaves a void in her wake.After 16 years beset by crises and critics, Angela
Merkel, arguably the world’s most powerful woman, is stepping down from the
world stage.On Sunday, Germany will elect a new government that won’t be helmed
by "mutti," or mommy, as many of her compatriots dub her, although she has no
children herself.Merkel, 67, became the dominant political force in Europe
during her time in power as Germany’s first female chancellor, shepherding her
country and the continent through difficult times — from the 2008 financial
crash to an influx of migrants, Brexit and, more recently, the Covid-19
pandemic.Her absence will be felt not only in Berlin, but also in Paris and
Washington.Then-President Donald Trump talking with German Chancellor Angela
Merkel and surrounded by other G7 leaders in La Malbaie, Quebec, Canada, in June
2018.Jesco Denzel / AFP - Getty ImagesAt home, Merkel, seen by many to be a
stable hand, is still more popular than any of the current party leaders, who
polls show have yet to really capture the country’s imagination.She’s also well
regarded among Germany’s main allies and neighbors, according to a YouGov survey
last month.“Probably her least seen achievement is how Germany rose in
importance, in power and strength within Europe, but also in the world stage,
and that rise, that growth never really was a threat to Germany's neighbors,”
said Stefan Kornelius, author of “Angela Merkel: The Chancellor and Her
World.”“Germany was a problem-solver, a balancer for all of Europe,” Kornelius
said. “And that's a new role, and it will be actually pretty difficult for her
successor to maintain this.”The country’s first East German leader, Merkel
studied physics and earned a doctorate in chemistry before working for several
years as a researcher.It was only after the fall of the Berlin Wall that she got
involved in politics. She quickly rose in prominence, and in 1991 she became the
youngest member of Chancellor Helmut Kohl’s Cabinet as minister for women and
youth.In 2000, she replaced Kohl, who had also been in office for 16 years, as
party leader and was then elected chancellor in 2005.Angela Merkel, then the
German minister for women and youth, sits next to former Chancellor Helmut Kohl
in Dresden, Germany, in December 1991.Picture Alliance / via Getty Images
fileHer experience growing up in communist East Germany greatly influenced her
politics, and it’s one she refers to often.“Speaking for myself, as someone who
lived 35 years under a system that denied its citizens freedom, the decision to
limit these rights during the pandemic was one that I found immensely hard to
take,” she said in a speech to the European Parliament in July 2020.Throughout
her time at the helm, she’s fended off critics and internal party rivals and
taken a lead in difficult negotiations with other countries. Her ability to
build consensus was particularly evident when it came to the sanctions that the
United States and Europe placed on Russia after its invasion of Ukraine in 2014,
according to Rachel Tausendfreund, a transatlantic analyst at the German
Marshall Fund think tank.“She really managed to bring other Europeans together
on a few important issues and issues that were really important to transatlantic
politics, so she has a strong legacy in that regard,” she said. “She waited for
the time to be right, and she managed to pull a lot of different people around
the table together.”What next?Despite her achievements, one thing Merkel was
unable to do was to develop a credible successor in her own party.“The last 16
years of German politics have had one constant, Angela Merkel, and there was an
incredible stability in leadership and policy,” said Julian Müller-Kaler, an
expert at the German Council on Foreign Relations focusing on American
politics.Her Christian Democratic Union party and its top candidate Armin
Laschet are trailing in the polls. The current vice chancellor and finance
minister, Olaf Scholz, who heads the center-left Social Democrats, has presented
himself as the candidate most qualified to carry on Merkel’s legacy in a race
that has focused heavily on the pandemic, as well as climate change and its
economic impact.Merkel won’t be gone right away, though. Whichever party comes
out on top will likely need to form a coalition to take charge, and her
government will stay in power until talks to form a new one are complete. How
long that could take is anybody’s guess.Download the NBC News app for breaking
news and politicsNo matter who takes over, the next German leader will have to
confront several looming international issues from the outset. For the U.S.,
Germany's relationships with Russia and China in particular may cause
friction.The U.S. and Germany already have differing opinions on the Nord Stream
2 pipeline, which will double Russia's gas export capacity to Europe and bypass
Ukraine. Germany’s economy is also highly intertwined with China, its largest
trading partner, at a time when the U.S. and China are increasingly at odds over
trade.“There will be a new China policy, and that will have significant
implications for the transatlantic relationship,” Müller-Kaler said. “If the
U.S. forces political allies to take a harsher stand, Europe and Germany will be
caught in the crossfire.”Chancellor Angela Merkel at a news conference after
visiting the flood-ravaged spa town Bad Munstereifel, Germany, in July.Christof
Stache / AFP - Getty ImagesThe candidate vying to replace Merkel in her own
constituency believes that locally, climate change is the issue that is front of
mind for many, especially young people.“No one can copy Angela Merkel and her
leadership role, but I still believe that we will continue to bank on very good
[international] relations,” said Georg Guenther, 33, a member of Merkel’s
party.However significant the change in leadership will be for Germany’s allies,
foreign policy has so far hardly factored in the campaign, and the debates have
had few, if any, questions on Germany’s relationship with the world.For their
part, the two likeliest candidates to become chancellor, Laschet and Scholz, are
clearly trying to woo voters partial to Merkel.“Er kann kanzlerin,” or, “He can
be chancellor,” read one ad for Scholz, using the female form of the word
chancellor, which is used for Merkel. He was also photographed for a magazine
cover using Merkel’s signature diamond hand gesture, made by resting the hands
in front of the stomach and putting the thumbs and index fingers into a
quadrangular shape.Laschet, the governor of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany's
most populous state, is trailing in the polls behind Scholz. In a damaging gaffe
this summer, Laschet was shown on camera laughing while visiting one of the
towns damaged by deadly floods.Angela Merkel stands next to Armin Laschet, who
is vying to replace her as chancellor.  Germany tends to shy away from political
extremes thanks to its difficult past, although it’s seen a surge of the far
right and anti-immigration Alternative for Germany party since the country
opened its doors to nearly 1 million refugees in 2015. This upcoming change in
leadership, however, has some anxious for the future.According to one study by
the European Council on Foreign Relations, more than half of those polled said
they think their country’s golden age is in the past.No matter who comes out on
top, Merkel’s experience will be hard to replace.“Sixteen years of relationships
is important in politics, and whoever comes in isn’t going to have that stature,
isn’t going to have that kind of history and practice,” Tausendfreund said. “On
the international stage, as well, there was a picture of Merkel having built up
relationships, having chips to trade in and out and just knowing how things
work, knowing who is important to talk to.”Carlo Angerer reported from Munich;
Andy Eckardt from Mainz, Germany; and Rachel Elbaum from London.Carlo
AngererCarlo Angerer is a multimedia producer and reporter based in Mainz,
Germany. Andy EckardtAndy Eckardt is the Deputy Director, Europe, for NBC News.
He is based in Mainz, Germany. Rachel ElbaumRachel Elbaum is a London-based
editor, producer and writer. 